Create Filter and Aggregate log data section (#3246)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/logs-filter.asciidoc

[[logs-filter-and-aggregate]]
= Filter and aggregate logs

> Filter and aggregate your log data to find specific information, gain insight, and monitor your systems more efficiently. You can filter and aggregate based on structured fields like timestamps, log levels, and IP addresses that you've extracted from your log data. If still need to parse your log data and extract structured fields, see the <<logs-stream-parse>> documentation.
> 
> See the following sections for more on filtering and aggregating your log data:
> 
> * <<logs-filter>> — Narrow down your log data by applying specific criteria.
> * <<logs-aggregate>> — Analyze and summarize data to find patterns and gain insight.

Reviewer: Maybe restructure?

```suggestion
Filter and aggregate your log data to find specific information, gain insight, and monitor your systems more efficiently. You can filter and aggregate based on structured fields like timestamps, log levels, and IP addresses that you've extracted from your log data. This guide shows you how to:

* <<logs-filter>> — Narrow down your log data by applying specific criteria.
* <<logs-aggregate>> — Analyze and summarize data to find patterns and gain insight.

If you haven't parsed your log data and extract structured fields yet, start with the <<logs-stream-parse>> documentation.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if line 9 in the suggestion above is necessary. Is it just repeating what's in the next section?

[discrete]
[[logs-filter-and-aggregate-prereq]]
== Before you get started

> The examples on this page use the following ingest pipeline and index template, which you can set in *Dev Tools*. For more on using ingest pipelines and index templates with your log data, see the <<logs-stream-parse>> documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The examples on this page use the following ingest pipeline and index template, which you can set in *Dev Tools*. For more on using ingest pipelines and index templates with your log data, refer to the <<logs-stream-parse>> documentation.
```

    "settings": {
      "index.default_pipeline":"logs-example-default"<4>
    }
  },
  "composed_of": [
    "logs-mappings",
    "logs-settings",
    "logs@custom",
    "ecs@dynamic_templates"
  ],
  "ignore_missing_component_templates": ["logs@custom"],
}
----

[discrete]
[[logs-filter]]
== Filter logs

Filter your data using the fields you've extracted so you can focus on log data with specific log levels, timestamp ranges, or host IPs. You can filter your log data in different ways:

- <<logs-filter-logs-explorer>> – Filter and visualize log data in {kib} using Logs Explorer.
- <<logs-filter-qdsl>> – Filter log data from Dev Tools using Query DSL.

[discrete]
[[logs-filter-logs-explorer]]
=== Filter logs in Logs Explorer

Logs Explorer is a {kib} tool that automatically provides views of your log data based on integrations and data streams. You can find Logs Explorer in the Observability menu under *Logs*. Use the {kibana-ref}/kuery-query.html[{kib} Query Language (KQL)] in the search bar to narrow down the log data displayed in Logs Explorer.

For example, you might want to look into an event that occurred within a specific time range (between September 14th and 15th).

> First, from *Dev Tools* add some logs with varying timestamps and log levels to your data stream with the following command:

Reviewer: It might be good to reorient the user since we're on a new page:

```suggestion
Add some logs with varying timestamps and log levels to your data stream:

. In {kib}, go to *Management* -> *Dev Tools*.
. In the *Console* tab, run the following command:
```

[source,console]
----
POST logs-example-default/_bulk
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-15T08:15:20.234Z WARN 192.168.1.101 Disk usage exceeds 90%." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-14T10:30:45.789Z ERROR 192.168.1.102 Critical system failure detected." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-10T14:20:45.789Z ERROR 192.168.1.105 Database connection lost." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-20T09:40:32.345Z INFO 192.168.1.106 User logout initiated." }
----

From Logs Explorer, add the following KQL query in the search bar to filter for logs with within your timestamp range with log levels of `WARN` and `ERROR`:

[source,text]
----
@timestamp >= "2023-09-14T00:00:00" and @timestamp <= "2023-09-15T23:59:59" and log.level : "ERROR" or  log.level : "WARN"
----

Under the *Documents* tab, you'll see the filtered log data matching your query. 

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/logs-kql-filter.png[Filter data by log level using KQL]

Make sure the logs you're looking for fall within the time range in Logs Explorer. If you don't see your logs, update the time range by clicking the image:images/time-filter-icon.png[calendar icon, width=36px].

> For more on using Logs Explorer, see the {kibana-ref}/discover.html[Discover] documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more on using Logs Explorer, refer to the {kibana-ref}/discover.html[Discover] documentation.
```

[discrete]
[[logs-filter-qdsl]]
=== Filter logs with Query DSL

{ref}/query-dsl.html[Query DSL] is a JSON-based language used to send requests to {es} and retrieve data from indices and data streams. Filter your log data using Query DSL from *Dev Tools*.

> For example, you might want to troubleshoot an issue that happened at a specific date or time. To do this, use a boolean query with a {ref}/query-dsl-range-query.html[range query] to filter for the specific timestamp range and a {ref}/query-dsl-term-query.html[term query] to filter for `WARN` and `ERROR` log levels.

Reviewer: Should it be "at a specific date or time", "on a specific date or time", or "on a specific date or at a specific time"? I'm stumped.

First, add some logs with varying timestamps and log levels to your data stream with the following command:

[source,console]
----
POST logs-example-default/_bulk
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-15T08:15:20.234Z WARN 192.168.1.101 Disk usage exceeds 90%." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-14T10:30:45.789Z ERROR 192.168.1.102 Critical system failure detected." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-10T14:20:45.789Z ERROR 192.168.1.105 Database connection lost." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-20T09:40:32.345Z INFO 192.168.1.106 User logout initiated." }
----

> Let's say you want to look into an event that occurred between September 14th and 15th. The following boolean query  filters for logs with timestamps during those days with a log level of `ERROR` or `WARN`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say you want to look into an event that occurred between September 14th and 15th. The following boolean query filters for logs with timestamps during those days that also have a log level of `ERROR` or `WARN`.
```

[source,console]
----
POST logs-example-default/_bulk
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-15T08:15:20.234Z WARN 192.168.1.101 Disk usage exceeds 90%." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-14T10:30:45.789Z ERROR 192.168.1.102 Critical system failure detected." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-15T12:45:55.123Z INFO 192.168.1.103 Application successfully started." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-14T15:20:10.789Z WARN 192.168.1.104 Network latency exceeding threshold." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-10T14:20:45.789Z ERROR 192.168.1.105 Database connection lost." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-20T09:40:32.345Z INFO 192.168.1.106 User logout initiated." }
{ "create": {} }
{ "message": "2023-09-21T15:20:55.678Z DEBUG 192.168.1.102 Database connection established." }
----

Next, run this command to aggregate your log data using the `log.level` field:

[source,console]
----
POST logs-example-default/_search?size=0&filter_path=aggregations
{
"size": 0,
"aggs": {
    "log_level_distribution": {
      "terms": {
        "field": "log.level"
      }
    }
  }
}
----

> NOTE: Searches with an aggregation return both the query results and the aggregation, so you would see the logs matching the data and the aggregation. Setting `size` to `0` in the previous example limits the results to aggregations.

Reviewer: Should this be a code callout for line 230 instead?
